docs: general edits to dashboard overview (#69747)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/fundamentals/dashboards-overview/index.md

Have you ever wondered what a dashboard is? In the observability world, this term is frequently used, but what exactly does it mean? The concept is borrowed from automobiles, where a dashboard gives drivers access to the controls necessary to operate a vehicle. Similarly, digital dashboards help us comprehend and manage systems. This topic explains how Grafana dashboards function, enabling you to create your own with greater ease.

The following image illustrates a sample Grafana dashboard:

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards-overview/complex-dashboard-example.png" max-width="750px" caption="Example Grafana dashboard" >}}

A Grafana dashboard consists of panels displaying data in beautiful graphs, charts, and other visualizations. These panels are created using components that transform raw data from a data source into visualizations. The process involves passing data through three gates: a plugin, a query, and an optional transformation.

> The image below displays all the gates, followed by detailed explanations of their purpose, usage, and significance. The process of creating a visualization starts from the data source and progresses towards a Grafana dashboard.

Author: The second sentence here seems repetitive and not as clear as the way it's already been said on line 23. I think we should take it out.
```suggestion
The image below displays all the gates, followed by detailed explanations of their purpose, usage, and significance.
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards-overview/dashboard-component-architecture.png" max-width="750px" caption="Dashboard component architecture" >}}

## Data sources

A data source refers to any entity that consists of data. It can be an SQL database, Grafana Loki, Grafana Mimir, or a JSON-based API. It can even be a basic CSV file. The first step in creating a dashboard visualization is selecting the data source that contains the data you need.

> It can be difficult to understand the distinctions between different data sources as each possesses its own structure and requires different query methods. However, to streamline this complexity, Grafana Labs has created plugins that unify data sources into one coherent view.

Author: In the second sentence, is the coherent view you're talking about in the dashboard or elsewhere? Not clear what you mean here?

Reviewer: The 'coherent view' is in the dashboard, but you can probably remove 'coherent'.

Author: I'm not _super_ sure the problem statement set up in the first sentence is really being answered by the second sentence. It just feels a little vague to me. I think the phrase "streamline complexity" feels a little ephemeral to me, and the mention of plugins here feels like a distraction. Thinking maybe something like:

```suggestion
It can be difficult to understand the distinctions between different data sources as each possesses its own structure and requires different query methods. However, in dashboards, you can see different data sources visualized in one single view, making it easier to understand your data overall. 
```

The image below displays all the gates, followed by detailed explanations of their purpose, usage, and significance. The process of creating a visualization starts from the data source and progresses towards a Grafana dashboard.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards-overview/dashboard-component-architecture.png" max-width="750px" caption="Dashboard component architecture" >}}

## Data sources

A data source refers to any entity that consists of data. It can be an SQL database, Grafana Loki, Grafana Mimir, or a JSON-based API. It can even be a basic CSV file. The first step in creating a dashboard visualization is selecting the data source that contains the data you need.

It can be difficult to understand the distinctions between different data sources as each possesses its own structure and requires different query methods. However, to streamline this complexity, Grafana Labs has created plugins that unify data sources into one coherent view.

## Plugins

> A Grafana plugin is software that adds new capabilities to Grafana. They come in many types, but right now we'll address _data source plugins_. The job of a Grafana data source plugin is to take a query you want answered, retrieve the data from the data source, and reconcile the differences in data models using a unified data structure called a [data frame](/docs/grafana/latest/developers/plugins/data-frames/). The data coming into the plugin from the data source might be many different formats (such as JSON, rows and columns, or CSV), but when it leaves the plugin and moves through the rest of the gates toward a visualization, it's always data frames.

Author: I know this is wordier, but I want to be really explicit here. @chri2547 - lemme know if you think there's a way to reword that second sentence so we don't lose any of the explicit references to the two data models we're talking about, but is maybe more elegant. 

```suggestion
A Grafana plugin is software that adds new capabilities to Grafana. They come in many types, but right now we'll address _data source plugins_. The job of a Grafana data source plugin is to take a query you want answered, retrieve the data from the data source, and reconcile the differences between the data model of the data source and the data model of Grafana dashboards. It does this using a unified data structure called a [data frame](/docs/grafana/latest/developers/plugins/data-frames/). 

The data coming into the plugin from the data source might be in many different formats (such as JSON, rows and columns, or CSV), but when it leaves the plugin and moves through the rest of the gates toward a visualization, it's always in data frames.
```

> 

Author: On the line above (line 37), I'm not clear what the two data models are in the phrase "reconcile the differences in data models". The data model of the data source and the dashboard? Or something else?

Reviewer 2: @imatwawana this relates to your last point -- let me sort of explain, then you be the judge of how best to express this.

So there's a zillion different databases.  Some have json documents, some have tables, some have text, some have metrics, lots of "different kinds of stuff"

In grafana, dashboard panels only understand one thing:  data frames.

So what I'm trying to say here is that plugins know how to talk to underlying databases in whatever their lingua franca is (tables, json, text, metrics, whatever) -- and translate that into "data frames".  In this way, we can use the same visualization panel (like a timeseries viz) on *any kind of data*.

That's a longer version of what I'm trying to say in that paragraph, but you be the judge of what best arrives.

Author: Okay that's much clearer to me. I've made a suggestion above.

When working with data sources, it is crucial to recognize that each one has its own distinct query language. For example, Prometheus data sources utilize [PromQL](/blog/2020/02/04/introduction-to-promql-the-prometheus-query-language/), while [LogQL](/docs/loki/latest/logql/) is used for logs, and particular databases employ SQL. A query is the foundation of every visualization in Grafana, and a dashboard might use a range of query languages.

The following image shows the Query Editor associated with the Prometheus data source. The `node_cpu_seconds_total` query is written in PromQL and requests just one metric:

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards-overview/example-query.png" max-width="750px" caption="Example query" >}}

> ## Transformations

Author: I've changed every instance of "transforms" to "transformations" per [our other docs on this topic](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/v9.4/panels-visualizations/query-transform-data/transform-data/). If this is a problem, let's discuss.

Reviewer 2: it's not a problem. Thumbs up, I didn't know we had standardized on that language so I didn't know to use it.

The following image shows the transformation dialog:

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/dashboards-overview/example-transform-chain.png" max-width="750px" caption="Example chain of transformations" >}}

## Panels

After the data is sourced, queried, and transformed, it passes to a panel, which is the final gate in the journey to a Grafana visualization. A panel is a container that displays the visualization and provides you with various controls to manipulate it. The panel configuration is where you specify how you want to see the data. For example, you use a drop-down menu in the top-right of the panel to specify the type of visualization you want to see, such as a bar chart, pie chart, or histogram.

> The panel options let you customize many aspects of the visualization and change them based on the visualization you select. Panels also contain queries that specify the data the panel is visualizing.

Reviewer: them=visualizations
